Gazebo new vehicles, ROS 2 frame conventions, multi vehicle simulation (#2396)
PX4/PX4-user_guide: en/middleware/xrce_dds.md

Therefore for Ethernet connections you will _have_ to use a command to start the client.
:::

On the simulator the client is automatically started on localhost UDP port 8888.

> Moreover, the startup scripts take into account [multi vehicle simulations](../ros/ros2_multi_vehicle.md) and their configuration.

Reviewer: FYI these bits might lead to some conflict with #2352

Reviewer: @beniaminopozzan The second line confuses me a bit. We start using parameters most of the time "in future" so is this saying that parameters won't take into account multi vehicle, or that if I write a start up script it has to take into account multi-vehicle simulation?

Author: @hamishwillee Yes, most likely they will

At the moment you can do almost everything with parameters: set the IP, port, session key. However, namespaces cannot be set with parameters and users need to start the agent manually and use either the `-s` argument or `PX4_MICRODDS_NS`. There is no other way.
To have multi vehicle setups (simulation or real vehicles) you need to set namespaces.
Therefore:

- Parameters won't take into account multi vehicle? Yes, they won't. And this behavior will not change until string parameter will be supported in PX4.
- If I write a start up script it has to take into account multi-vehicle simulation? If you write a startup script and you want to perform multi-vehicle simulation, then yes, your script must handle them. If you don't want to perform multi-vehicle simulation then no, your script doesn't have to handle them.

Reviewer: Thanks for the clarification. I guess it is a bit confusing because we're talking about "the startup scripts" here as though users know what specific scripts you mean.

How about this?

```suggestion
On the simulator the client is automatically started on localhost UDP port 8888.

Note that startup commands are used in startup scripts for [multi vehicle simulations](../ros/ros2_multi_vehicle.md), enabling the setting of appropriate instance ids and DDS namespace.
```

Author: As

> On the simulator the client is automatically started on localhost UDP port 8888.

is already mentioned in the first note for "Starting the Client", another possibility is

```suggestion
The simulator [startup logic](../concept/system_startup.md) ([init.d-posix/rcS](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/ROMFS/px4fmu_common/init.d-posix/rcS)) uses the client startup commands for single and [multi vehicle simulations](../ros/ros2_multi_vehicle.md), enabling the setting of appropriate instance ids and DDS namespaces.
```

Reviewer: Yes.

While most releases should support a very similar set of messages, to be certain you would need to check the yaml file for your particular release.
<!-- Jublish the set we use?: https://github.com/PX4/px4_msgs/issues/22 -->

Note that ROS 2/DDS needs to have the _same_ message definitions that were used to create the XRCE-DDS client module in the PX4 Firmware in order to interpret the messages.

> The definition are stored in the ROS 2 interface package [PX4/px4_msgs](https://github.com/PX4/px4_msgs) and they are automatically synchronized by CI on the `main` and release branches.

Reviewer: @beniaminopozzan It used to be that they included all messages - do they now just contain the ones that are available?

Author: @hamishwillee it still includes all messages as it generally simplify the setup. Why? Because if
all messages are included then a user who just wants to add a new topic to the bridge only needs to update dds_topics.yaml without even recompiling the ROS 2 workspace.

But this is open to discussion. For example a good reason to limit the messages copied into px4_msgs only to those in dds_topics.yaml is that there are *a lot* of messages, and the compilation time can be quite annoying. Even more if you are compiling on a Raspberry Pi.

Reviewer: Fair enough. I think it worth clarifying that just because a message is in that folder doesn't mean it is built.

```suggestion
All PX4 message definitions are stored in the ROS 2 interface package [PX4/px4_msgs](https://github.com/PX4/px4_msgs), and they are automatically synchronized by CI on the `main` and release branches.
```

Therefore,

- If you're using a main or release version of PX4 you can get the message definitions by cloning the interface package [PX4/px4_msgs](https://github.com/PX4/px4_msgs) into your workspace.

> - If you're creating your own new topics e/o uORB messages you will need to update [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml), clone the the interface package and then manually synchronize it by copying the new/modified message definitions from [PX4-Autopilot/msg](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/tree/main/msg) to its `msg` folders. Assuming that PX4-Autopilot is in your home directory `~` while `px4_msgs` is in `~/px4_ros_com/src/`, then the command can be

Reviewer: This is just to add a line break:
```suggestion
- If you're creating your own new topics e/o uORB messages you will need to update [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml), clone the the interface package and then manually synchronize it by copying the new/modified message definitions from [PX4-Autopilot/msg](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/tree/main/msg) to its `msg` folders. Assuming that PX4-Autopilot is in your home directory `~` while `px4_msgs` is in `~/px4_ros_com/src/`, then the command might be:

```

  ```sh
  rm ~/px4_ros_com/src/px4_msgs/msg/*.msg
  cp ~/PX4-Autopilot/mgs/*.msg ~/px4_ros_com/src/px4_msgs/msg/
  ```
  
  :::note
  Technically, [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml) completely defines the pairing between PX4 message and topics and the ROS 2 ones.
  It is structured as follows:
  ```
  publications:

    - topic: /fmu/out/collision_constraints
      type: px4_msgs::msg::CollisionConstraints

    ...  

    - topic: /fmu/out/vehicle_odometry
      type: px4_msgs::msg::VehicleOdometry

    - topic: /fmu/out/vehicle_status
      type: px4_msgs::msg::VehicleStatus

    - topic: /fmu/out/vehicle_trajectory_waypoint_desired
      type: px4_msgs::msg::VehicleTrajectoryWaypoint

  subscriptions:

    - topic: /fmu/in/offboard_control_mode
      type: px4_msgs::msg::OffboardControlMode

    ...

    - topic: /fmu/in/vehicle_trajectory_waypoint
      type: px4_msgs::msg::VehicleTrajectoryWaypoint
  ```
  
  Each (`topic`,`type`) pairs defines

>   1. A new subscription or publication depending on the list it is added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. A new subscription or publication depending on the list to which it is added.
```

>   2. The topic _base name_, which MUST coincide with the desired uORB topic name that you want to publish/subscribe.

Reviewer: FYI There is nothing wrong with highlighting MUST, but I prefer to use bold/italic, and have done so across the docs. There are exceptions.

```suggestion
  2. The topic _base name_, which **must** coincide with the desired uORB topic name that you want to publish/subscribe.
```

     It is identified by the last token in `topic:` that starts with `/` and does not contains any `/` in it.
     `vehicle_odometry`, `vehicle_status` and `offboard_control_mode` are examples of base names.
  3. The topic [namespace](https://design.ros2.org/articles/topic_and_service_names.html#namespaces). 

>      By default it is set to
>       - `/fmu/out/` for topics that are _published_ by PX4.

Reviewer: FYI, Sentence preceding list should start with `:`. Empty line of space also nice.
```suggestion
     By default it is set to:
     
      - `/fmu/out/` for topics that are _published_ by PX4.
```

>       - `/fmu/in/` for topics that are _subscirbed_ by PX4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `/fmu/in/` for topics that are _subscribed_ by PX4.
```

>   4. The message type (`VehicleOdometry`, `VehicleStatus`, `OffboardControlMode`, ecc) and the ROS 2 package (`px4_msgs`) that is expected to provide the message definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  4. The message type (`VehicleOdometry`, `VehicleStatus`, `OffboardControlMode`, etc.) and the ROS 2 package (`px4_msgs`) that is expected to provide the message definition.
```

>   You can arbitrary change the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can arbitrarily change the configuration.
```

  For example, you could use different default namespaces or use a custom package to store the message definitions. 
  :::

### Customizing the topic namespace

> Custom topic namespaces can be applied at build time (changing [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml)) or at runtime (useful for multi vehicle operations):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom topic namespaces can be applied at build time (changing [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml)) or at runtime (which is useful for multi vehicle operations):
```

>  - One possibility is to use the `-n` option when starting the [microdds-client](../modules/modules_system.md#microdds-client) from command line. This technique can be used both in simulation and real vehicles.

Reviewer: FYI only. I prefer to break on sentences. That is to my taste only.

```suggestion
 - One possibility is to use the `-n` option when starting the [microdds-client](../modules/modules_system.md#microdds-client) from command line.
   This technique can be used both in simulation and real vehicles.
```

>  - Only in simulation, where the client is automatically started, a custom namespace can be provided setting the environment variable `PX4_MICRODDS_NS` before starting the simulation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - a custom namespace can be provided for simulations (only) by setting the environment variable `PX4_MICRODDS_NS` before starting the simulation.
```

Author: LGTM @hamishwillee

:::note
Changing the namespace at runtime will append the desired namespace as a prefix to all `topic` fields in [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml).

> Therefore, commands like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, commands like:

```

```sh
microdds_client start -n uav_1
```

> or

Reviewer: ```suggestion

or

```

```sh
PX4_MICRODDS_NS=uav_1 make px4_sitl gz_x500
```

> will generate topics under the namespaces

Reviewer: ```suggestion

will generate topics under the namespaces:

```

The definition are stored in the ROS 2 interface package [PX4/px4_msgs](https://github.com/PX4/px4_msgs) and they are automatically synchronized by CI on the `main` and release branches.
Therefore,

- If you're using a main or release version of PX4 you can get the message definitions by cloning the interface package [PX4/px4_msgs](https://github.com/PX4/px4_msgs) into your workspace.
- If you're creating your own new topics e/o uORB messages you will need to update [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml), clone the the interface package and then manually synchronize it by copying the new/modified message definitions from [PX4-Autopilot/msg](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/tree/main/msg) to its `msg` folders. Assuming that PX4-Autopilot is in your home directory `~` while `px4_msgs` is in `~/px4_ros_com/src/`, then the command can be
  ```sh
  rm ~/px4_ros_com/src/px4_msgs/msg/*.msg
  cp ~/PX4-Autopilot/mgs/*.msg ~/px4_ros_com/src/px4_msgs/msg/
  ```
  
  :::note

>   Technically, [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml) completely defines the pairing between PX4 message and topics and the ROS 2 ones.

Reviewer: Below seems like a bit of duplication with the ROS2 additions for custom uorb. Propose we add a section

"DDS Topics YAML" which covers the format and is linked from both these places?

    ...

    - topic: /fmu/in/vehicle_trajectory_waypoint
      type: px4_msgs::msg::VehicleTrajectoryWaypoint
  ```
  
  Each (`topic`,`type`) pairs defines

  1. A new subscription or publication depending on the list to which it is added.
  2. The topic _base name_, which **must** coincide with the desired uORB topic name that you want to publish/subscribe.
     It is identified by the last token in `topic:` that starts with `/` and does not contains any `/` in it.
     `vehicle_odometry`, `vehicle_status` and `offboard_control_mode` are examples of base names.
  3. The topic [namespace](https://design.ros2.org/articles/topic_and_service_names.html#namespaces). 
     By default it is set to:
     
      - `/fmu/out/` for topics that are _published_ by PX4.
      - `/fmu/in/` for topics that are _subscribed_ by PX4.
  4. The message type (`VehicleOdometry`, `VehicleStatus`, `OffboardControlMode`, etc.) and the ROS 2 package (`px4_msgs`) that is expected to provide the message definition.

  You can arbitrarily change the configuration.
  For example, you could use different default namespaces or use a custom package to store the message definitions. 
  :::

> ### Customizing the topic namespace

Reviewer: This is a lower level heading (3) than the parent (2 - ""Supported uORB Messages"). Is that the intent? If not, perhaps this should go up one level.

Custom topic namespaces can be applied at build time (changing [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml)) or at runtime (which is useful for multi vehicle operations):

 - One possibility is to use the `-n` option when starting the [microdds-client](../modules/modules_system.md#microdds-client) from command line.
   This technique can be used both in simulation and real vehicles.
 - Only in simulation, where the client is automatically started, a custom namespace can be provided setting the environment variable `PX4_MICRODDS_NS` before starting the simulation.

:::note
Changing the namespace at runtime will append the desired namespace as a prefix to all `topic` fields in [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml).
Therefore, commands like:

```sh
microdds_client start -n uav_1
```

or

```sh
PX4_MICRODDS_NS=uav_1 make px4_sitl gz_x500
```

will generate topics under the namespaces:

```sh
/uav_1/fmu/in/  # for subscribers
/uav_1/fmu/out/ # for publishers
```
:::

> ### PX4 ROS 2 QoS Settings

Reviewer: This heading is nested below Supported "uORB Messages" too. Probably should go up one level as well.

While most releases should support a very similar set of messages, to be certain you would need to check the yaml file for your particular release.
<!-- Jublish the set we use?: https://github.com/PX4/px4_msgs/issues/22 -->

Note that ROS 2/DDS needs to have the _same_ message definitions that were used to create the XRCE-DDS client module in the PX4 Firmware in order to interpret the messages.
The message definitions are stored in the ROS 2 interface package [PX4/px4_msgs](https://github.com/PX4/px4_msgs), and they are automatically synchronized by CI on the `main` and release branches.
Note that all the messages from PX4 source code are present in the repository, but only those listed in `dds_topics.yaml` will be available as ROS 2 topics.
Therefore,

- If you're using a main or release version of PX4 you can get the message definitions by cloning the interface package [PX4/px4_msgs](https://github.com/PX4/px4_msgs) into your workspace.
- If you're creating or modifying uORB messages you must manually update the messages in your workspace from your PX4 source tree.

>   Generally this means that you would update [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml), clone the the interface package, and then manually synchronize it by copying the new/modified message definitions from [PX4-Autopilot/msg](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/tree/main/msg) to its `msg` folders.

Author: ```suggestion
  Generally this means that you would update [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml), clone the interface package, and then manually synchronize it by copying the new/modified message definitions from [PX4-Autopilot/msg](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/tree/main/msg) to its `msg` folders.
```

  Assuming that PX4-Autopilot is in your home directory `~`, while `px4_msgs` is in `~/px4_ros_com/src/`, then the command might be:

  ```sh
  rm ~/px4_ros_com/src/px4_msgs/msg/*.msg
  cp ~/PX4-Autopilot/mgs/*.msg ~/px4_ros_com/src/px4_msgs/msg/
  ```
  
  :::note
  Technically, [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml) completely defines the relationship between PX4 uORB topics and ROS 2 messages.
  For more information see [DDS Topics YAML](#dds-topics-yaml) below.
  :::

## Customizing the Topic Namespace

Custom topic namespaces can be applied at build time (changing [dds_topics.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/microdds_client/dds_topics.yaml)) or at runtime (which is useful for multi vehicle operations):

 - One possibility is to use the `-n` option when starting the [microdds-client](../modules/modules_system.md#microdds-client) from command line.
   This technique can be used both in simulation and real vehicles.

>  - a custom namespace can be provided for simulations (only) by setting the environment variable `PX4_MICRODDS_NS` before starting the simulation.

Author: ```suggestion
 - A custom namespace can be provided for simulations (only) by setting the environment variable `PX4_MICRODDS_NS` before starting the simulation.
```

Deadline, lifespan, and lease durations are also all set to "default".
<!-- From https://github.com/PX4/PX4-user_guide/pull/2259#discussion_r1099788316 -->

> ## DDS Topics YAML

Reviewer: @beniaminopozzan OK, I moved both headings up one level, and added this heading here for DDS Topics YAML. I have linked to this section (which duplicates your original text) from above and from the ROS2 Guide). We might even have more information/links here, but this is enough for now - i.e. in some places we talk a little about the file format where we could redirect here.

Before I did all that I rebased on main, so this now includes all your other PRs.

I'm going to leave with you to think about this as I have to go catch a plane. If you want to do a further round of edits let me know, otherwise we can merge and add next bits as a post-process. UP to you. I'll look in to see if you have commented in a couple of hours.
